---
title: "A translation of Joyal's paper introducing species"
---

    [BLOpts]
    profile = wp
    tags = combinatorics, species, French, English, translation, commentary, writing
    categories = combinatorics, species, writing, projects

Back when I was writing [my PhD thesis on combinatorial
species](https://github.com/byorgey/thesis), I was aware that André
Joyal's original papers introducing [combinatorial
species](wiki::combinatorial species) are written in French, which I
don't read.  I figured this was no big deal, since there is plenty of
secondary literature on species in English (most notably [Bergeron *et
al.*](http://www.cambridge.org/us/academic/subjects/mathematics/discrete-mathematics-information-theory-and-coding/combinatorial-species-and-tree-structures?format=HB&isbn=9780521573238),
which, though originally written in French, has been translated into
English by [Margaret Readdy](http://www.ms.uky.edu/~readdy/)).  But at
some point I asked a [question on
MathOverflow](https://mathoverflow.net/questions/171452/examples-of-functors-mathbfset-to-mathbfset-which-are-not-analytic)
to which I hadn't been able to find an answer, and was told that the
answer was already in one of Joyal's original papers!

So I set out to try to read Joyal's original papers in French (there
are two in particular: *Une théorie combinatoire des séries
formelles*, and *Foncteurs analytiques et espèces de structures*), and
found out that it was actually possible since (a) they are mathematics
papers, not high literature; (b) I already understand a lot of the
mathematics; and (c) these days, there are lots of tools to help, like
Google Translate.

However, although it was *possible* for me to read them, it was still
*hard work*, and for someone without my background in combinatorics it
would be very tough going---which is a shame since the papers are
really very beautiful.  So, I decided to do something about it! XXX I'm
making a translation, with my own commentary added.  I hope it will be
valuable to those in the English-speaking mathematics and computer
science communities who want to learn more about species or gain more
appreciation for a beautiful piece of mathematical history.

XXX very much a work in progress.  It's at least far enough along
that I'm not completely embarrassed to publicize it, but not much more
than that.  This is a long-term project for me---I hope to work on it
slowly but steadily.  But I would also welcome collaboration XXX.
